# Copyright 2025, Battelle Energy Alliance, LLC, ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

Sponsor Quesion 1:
Please take your time and be thorough in your answer.
Given the following priorities, write a research primer paper on what research has been completed in the past 5 years that helps fulfill these priorities? The paper should reference the originating papers.  
CESER’s Cybersecurity Priorities 
Priority 1 Increase Cyber Visibility of Critical Energy Systems and Networks We are continuing to advance technologies and systems that increase the visibility of cyber threats targeting energy companies’ industrial controls systems across the nation. With enhanced cyber visibility, detection, monitoring capabilities, we can respond and curtail confront malicious cyberattacks before they compromise critical systems. 
Priority 2 Build Security Into Future, Clean Energy Grid As we transition to a 100% clean energy economy, it is critical to build effective cybersecurity measures into the evolving grid to ensure a reliable flow of energy across the nation. CESER and its stakeholders are ensuring renewable technologies – from wind to solar – will be able to deliver a high volume of energy while addressing grid vulnerabilities.
Priority 3 Manage Supply Chain Risks in Digital Components of Nation’s Critical Energy Infrastructure Digital components in our national critical infrastructure are increasingly becoming the strategic target for adversary nations. We’re partnering across the energy sector to identify high priority digital components prevalent in the nation’s critical energy systems, perform expert testing, and share information about vulnerabilities in the digital supply chain. 
Priority 4 Strengthen the Current and Future Energy Cyber Workforce A highly skilled cybersecurity workforce across the energy sector is critical to protecting the nation’s energy systems. CESER is developing exercises, trainings, and resources that improve preparedness and coordination across governments and industry, while promoting a robust cybersecurity education for the next generation of cyber professionals. We are also utilizing Cyber-Informed Engineering – a methodology to ensure that cybersecurity is a core component in technologies from ideation to deployment.
Priority 5 Establish Policies, Procedures, and Capabilities to Enable Cyber Preparedness and Incident Response Through risk-based energy security planning and strategic partnerships across a broad range of stakeholders, CESER is establishing policies, procedures, and capabilities needed to improve energy sector cyber resilience, address new threats, conduct more efficient and effective response, and mitigate disruptions to energy infrastructure in case of  a cyberattack.


Cyber Analyst techniques to narrow to a specific report:
Exploit Public-Facing Application
Exploitation for Privilege Escalation
Scripting
Connection Proxy
Remote Services
Remote System Discovery
Service Stop

vs

Initial Access (TA0108), Exploit Public-Facing Application (T0819)
Privilege Escalation (TA0111), Exploitation for Privilege Escalation (T0890)
Execution (TA0104), Scripting (T0853)
Command and Control (TA0101), Connection Proxy (T0884)
Lateral Movement (TA0109), Remote Services (T0886)
Discovery (TA0102), Remote System Discovery (T0846)
Inhibit Response Function (TA0107), Service Stop (T0881)
*can be removed because it is close to impact. Specific targeting can be achieved with T0819, T0890, and T0884


Cyber Analyst question after identifying report:
Please give me an executive Summary of the CyOTE New Cooperative report including adversary, motivation, highly perceivable observables and potential mitigations.


Cyber Analyst prompt from Scout:
systemprompt = "You are a cybersecurity AI assistant that helps people find answers to their \
                  questions. Your users are cyber security analysts for Idaho National Laboratory.  \
                  You are polite, but give direct answers and do not repeat the question. You will often be provided with additional information for \
                  use in answering your questions. Use this information as much as possible to respond to the user."
article = "\r\n article: URL:'' Title: COMPANY OVERVIEW \r\n Founded in 1924, W.E.C. Oil and Gas Company has grown to become a leading energy provider in the United States.  With operations spanning all 50 states, W.E.C. is dedicated to delivering reliable and sustainable energy solutions to meet the nation's growing demands.\r\nMission Statement: Our mission is to power the future with innovative energy solutions while maintaining a commitment to environmental stewardship, safety, and community engagement.\r\nOperations:\r\nOil Refineries: W.E.C. operates 5 state-of-the-art oil refineries strategically located across the country. These refineries are equipped with the latest technology to ensure efficient and environmentally friendly processing of crude oil into gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and other essential petroleum products.\r\nRefinery IMPACT: The Atlanta refinery supplies 60 percent of the fuels to the Atlanta metropolitan area. The Idaho Falls Refinery supplies 100 percent of the fuel to Idaho Falls. \r\nNatural Gas Plants: W.E.C. manages 17 large natural gas plants that are integral to the production and distribution of natural gas. These facilities are crucial for providing clean and reliable energy to homes, businesses, and industries nationwide.\r\nNatural Gas IMPACT: The majority of the Natural Gas in Idaho, Montana, Utah, and Wyoming are supplied from W.E.C. During the Winter months this fuel is used to heat 600,000 households and provide power year round.\r\nSustainability Initiatives: W.E.C. Oil and Gas Company is committed to reducing its environmental footprint. We invest in advanced technologies and innovative practices to minimize emissions, enhance energy efficiency, and promote the use of renewable energy sources. Our sustainability programs include:\r\nReducing greenhouse gas emissions through carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies.\r\nInvesting in renewable energy projects such as wind and solar farms.\r\nImplementing water conservation measures and waste reduction programs at all facilities.\r\nSafety and Community: Safety is our top priority at W.E.C. We adhere to stringent safety protocols and continuously train our workforce to ensure a safe working environment. Additionally, we are deeply committed to the communities where we operate. Our community engagement efforts include:\r\nSupporting local education and workforce development programs.\r\nPartnering with local organizations to address community needs.\r\nProviding disaster relief and emergency response assistance.\r\nLeadership: W.E.C. Oil and Gas Company is led by a team of experienced professionals dedicated to driving the company's vision and mission. Our leadership team combines industry expertise with a forward-thinking approach to navigate the evolving energy landscape.\r\nContact Information: Corporate Headquarters 123 Energy Drive Houston, TX 77002 Phone: (555) 123-4567 Email: info@wecoilandgas.com\r\nAt W.E.C. Oil and Gas Company, we are proud to be at the forefront of the energy industry, delivering reliable energy solutions while prioritizing sustainability, safety, and community well-being.\r\n"
article += "\r\n article: URL:https://www.cisa.gov/stopransomware/ransomware-guide Title: #StopRansomware Guide | CISALock\nMeta Description: Updated in May 2023, the joint #StopRansomware Guide includes industry best practices and a response checklist that can serve as an addendum to organization\nParagraphs: An official website of the United States governmentHere’s how you know\n                Official websites use .gov\n                 A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.\n              \n                Secure .gov websites use HTTPS\n                 A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.\n              Ransomware is a form of malware designed to encrypt files on a device, rendering them and the systems that rely on them unusable. Malicious actors then demand ransom in exchange for decryption. Over time, malicious actors have adjusted their ransomware tactics to be more destructive and impactful and have also exfiltrated victim data and pressured victims to pay by threatening to release the stolen data. The application of both tactics is known as “double extortion.” In some cases, malicious actors may exfiltrate data and threaten to release it as their sole form of extortion without employing ransomware. These ransomware and associated data breach incidents can severely impact business processes by leaving organizations unable to access necessary data to operate and deliver mission-critical services. The economic and reputational impacts of ransomware and data extortion have proven challenging and costly for organizations of all sizes throughout the initial disruption and, at times, extended recovery. This guide is an update to the Joint Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) and Multi-State Information Sharing & Analysis Center (MS-ISAC) Ransomware Guide released in September 2020 (see \"What’s New\") and was developed through the Joint Ransomware Task Force. This guide includes two primary resources: Part 1 provides guidance for all organizations to reduce the impact and likelihood of ransomware incidents and data extortion, including best practices to prepare for, prevent, and mitigate these incidents. Prevention best practices are grouped by common initial access vectors. Part 2 includes a checklist of best practices for responding to these incidents. These ransomware and data extortion prevention and response best practices and recommendations are based on operational insight from CISA, MS-ISAC, the National Security Agency (NSA), and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), hereafter referred to as the authoring organizations. The audience for this guide includes information technology (IT) professionals as well as others within an organization involved in developing cyber incident response policies and procedures or coordinating cyber incident response. The authoring organizations recommend that organizations take the following initial steps to prepare and protect their facilities, personnel, and customers from cyber and physical security threats and other hazards: Engaging with peer organizations and CISA enables your organization to receive critical and timely information and access to services for managing ransomware and other cyber threats. Since the initial release of the Ransomware Guide in September 2020, ransomware actors have accelerated their tactics and techniques. To maintain relevancy, add perspective, and maximize the effectiveness of this guide, the following changes have been made: Read the full #StopRansomware Guide (September 2023).These recommended best practices align with the CPGs developed by CISA and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). The CPGs provide a minimum set of practices and protections that CISA and NIST recommend all organizations implement. CISA and NIST based the CPGs on existing cybersecurity frameworks and guidance to protect against the most common and impactful threats, tactics, techniques, and procedures. For more information on the CPGs and recommended baseline protections, visit CISA’s Cross-Sector Cybersecurity Performance Goals. Refer to the best practices and references listed in this section to help manage the risks posed by ransomware and to drive a coordinated and efficient response for your organization in the event of an incident. Apply these practices to the greatest extent possible pending the availability of organizational resources. Refer to the best practices and references listed in this section to help prevent and mitigate ransomware and data extortion incidents. Prevention best practices are grouped by common initial access vectors of ransomware and data extortion actors. Should your organization be a victim of ransomware, follow your approved IRP. The authoring organizations strongly recommend responding by using the following checklist. Be sure to move through the first three steps in sequence. Refer to the best practices and references below to help manage the risk posed by ransomware and support your organization’s coordinated and efficient response to a ransomware incident. Apply these practices to the greatest extent possible based on availability of organizational resources. Note: Refer to the Contact Information section at the end of this guide for details on how to report and notify about ransomware incidents. If no initial mitigation actions appear possible: To continue steps to contain and mitigate the incident:In responding to any cyber incident, Federal agencies will undertake threat response; asset response; and intelligence support and related activities. Upon voluntary request, federal asset response includes furnishing technical assistance to affected entities to protect their assets, mitigate vulnerabilities, and reduce impacts of cyber incidents; identifying other entities that may be at risk and assessing their risk to the same or similar vulnerabilities; assessing potential risks to the sector or region, including potential cascading effects, and developing courses of action to mitigate these risks; facilitating information sharing and operational coordination with threat response; and providing guidance on how best to utilize Federal resources and capabilities in a timely, effective manner to speed recovery. cisa.gov/reportCentral@cisa.gov or call 1-844-Say-CISA (1-844-729-2472)Cybersecurity Advisor (cisa.gov/cisa-regions): [Enter your local CISA CSA’s phone number and email address.]Upon voluntary request, or upon notification of partners, federal threat response includes conducting appropriate law enforcement and national security investigative activity at the affected entity’s site; collecting evidence and gathering intelligence; providing attribution; linking related incidents; identifying additional affected entities; identifying threat pursuit and disruption opportunities; developing and executing courses of action to mitigate the immediate threat; and facilitating information sharing and operational coordination with asset response. fbi.gov/contact-us/field-offices [Enter your local FBI field office POC phone number and email address.] FBI Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) at ic3.govConsider filling out Table 1 for use should your organization become affected by ransomware. Consider contacting these organizations for mitigation and response assistance or for notification. The information and opinions contained in this document are provided \"as is\" and without any warranties or guarantees. Reference herein to any specific commercial products, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government, and this guidance shall not be used for advertising or product endorsement purposes. This document was developed in furtherance of the authors’ cybersecurity missions, including their responsibilities to identify and disseminate threats, and to develop and issue cybersecurity specifications and mitigations. This information may be shared broadly to reach all appropriate stakeholders. Microsoft contributed to this joint guide."
article += "\r\n article: URL:https://www.cisecurity.org/insights/blog/7-steps-to-help-prevent-limit-the-impact-of-ransomware Title: Steps to Help Prevent & Limit the Impact of Ransomware\nMeta Description: To protect against ransomware, you need a holistic, all-hands-on-deck, defense-in-depth approach. Here are some steps to help you get started.\nParagraphs: Stay aware of emerging cyber, physical, and information threats with ThreatWA™ |  Subscribe NowFrom small local government entities to large organizations, ransomware attacks are everywhere. It's up to all of us to help prevent these attacks from being successful.Ransomware is a type of malware that encrypts files on a system or device in an attempt to coerce the victim to pay a ransom. Threat Actors (TAs) can also warn of files being leaked, erased, or inaccessible. TAs will drop ransom notes claiming responsibility and encourage a response from the victim through the medium they dictate, through encrypted chat or email (for example). Ransomware can be particularly harmful when it targets hospitals, emergency call centers, and other critical infrastructure, as a successful infection could disrupt access to systems and data necessary for delivering life-saving medical treatment and upholding public safety.To protect against ransomware, you need a holistic, all-hands-on-deck, defense-in-depth approach that brings together your entire organization. Below are four ways you can get started in your efforts to stop attacks and limit the effects of ransomware. We've mapped each step to the applicable security best practices of the CIS Critical Security Controls® (CIS Controls®) so that you can learn more on each topic.Create a scalable and practical incident response plan so you and your staff understand their responsibilities and communication protocols both during and after a cyber incident. Teams to include in your incident response plan include (but aren't limited to) IT, legal, and administrative teams. You should also include a list of contacts such as any partners, insurance providers, or vendors that would need to be notified. These plans should be run through a test process or \"tabletop exercise\" to assess the implementation, identify any gaps, and then refine plans accordingly. We recommend reviewing the plan on a quarterly basis to account for organizational growth and changes such as end-users/staff or IT assets and infrastructure.View CIS Control 17 for more on incident response management.Backing up important data is the single most effective way of recovering from a ransomware infection. There are some things to consider, however. Your backup files should be appropriately protected and stored offline or out-of-band so they can't be targeted by attackers. You can use cloud services to help mitigate a ransomware infection, as many of these services retain previous versions of files that allow you to roll back to an unencrypted version. Be sure to routinely test backups for efficacy. In the case of an attack, verify that your backups aren't infected and secure your backups immediately following the attack. It is also important to ensure that the integrity of said backups are maintained, and it is also important to confirm before rolling back.Control 11 provides more information about how to make a data recovery plan.You can't defend what you don't know about, so your first step here is developing asset inventories for your enterprise assets and software. You can do so using Control 1 and Control 2. Once you understand your attack surface, you can then move on ensuring your systems are configured with security in mind. Secure configuration settings can help limit your organization's threat surface and close security gaps left over from default configurations. Toward that end, you can use the secure recommendations of the CIS Benchmarks™, industry-leading, consensus-developed configurations which are freely available to all. Keep reading to explore several examples of effective hardening methods you can consider when reviewing the current security posture of your organization.Many ransomware variants take advantage of Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) port 3389 and Server Message Block (SMB) port 445. Consider whether your organization needs to leave these ports open and consider limiting connections to only trusted hosts. Be sure to review these settings for both on-premises and cloud environments, working with your cloud service provider to disable unused RDP ports.Control 4 describes different ways your organization can control network ports, protocols, and services.Make sure all of your organization’s operating systems, applications, and software are updated regularly. By applying the latest updates, you'll make progress in closing security gaps that attackers are looking to exploit. Where possible, turn on auto-updates so you’ll automatically have the latest security patches. In some environments, out-of-date software is necessary to utilize based on operational need. Strongly consider addressing those systems that contain particularly vulnerable software and deprecate/update as soon as possible.Additional information about updating and vulnerability management is available in Control 7.Prior to an incident, it is important to consider the overall visibility of your network and user accounts. You can improve your visibility by maintaining up-to-date network diagrams and storing them so they can be retrieved from secure containers. This also includes visibility of your end-user accounts. Review Active Directory for accounts that can be removed or no longer needed while implementing a strict naming convention and heavily discouraging the use of shared accounts, which would generate a system of accountability when assigning vendor accounts.Check out Control 5 for more details about managing your organization's accounts.To gauge your organization's overall security posture, review your access control policy and implementation. Specifically, review how your end-users connect to your network and resources, both internally and externally, and implement safeguards such as multi-factor authentication (MFA) on solutions such as your virtual private network (VPN) client and any portals or resources that can be accessed remotely by end-users. Other things you can consider include lockout policy, password age and complexity requirements, and security challenge questions.An Intrusion Detection System (IDS) looks for malicious activity by comparing network traffic logs to signatures that detect known malicious activity. A robust IDS will update signatures often and alert your organization quickly if it detects potential malicious activity.The Center for Internet Security® (CIS®) has developed Albert Network Monitoring Management, an IDS solution tailored to U.S. State, Local, Tribal, Territorial (SLTT) government organizations. It uses a custom set of signatures that are updated daily to help SLTTs detect malicious activity that precedes a ransomware infection.You can add an additional layer to your ransomware defenses by investing in endpoint protection. Ransomware is constantly evolving, which means you can't rely solely on signatures alone for your defense. You also need to monitor your endpoints to quickly identify and block malicious activity, even in instances where no one else has seen that exact activity before.That's the logic behind CIS Endpoint Security Services (ESS). CIS ESS uses Next Generation Antivirus (NGAV), Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR), and more to protect your endpoints against both known (signature-based) and unknown (behavior-based) malicious activity. ESS can also kill or quarantine files effectively stopping a ransomware attempt before it develops into an infection.Security awareness training is key to stopping ransomware in its tracks. When your employees can spot and avoid malicious emails, everyone plays a part in protecting the organization. Security awareness training can teach team members what to look for in an email before they click on a link or download an attachment. However, keep in mind that not all security awareness training solutions are created equal. Cost doesn’t drive effectiveness. You can model campaigns after real-world samples and challenge end-users to identify where improvements can be made.Control 8 describes the maintenance, monitoring, and analysis of audit logs that are managed by most commercial IDS solutions.When ransomware strikes, your organization needs to learn of an infection and investigate quickly so that you can protect your systems and data. Most organizations struggle to contain incidents quickly, however. In its 2023 Cost of a Data Breach Report, IBM found that organizations took 204 days to identify a breach and 73 days to contain them. That's plenty of time for TAs to encrypt your files.It doesn't have to be that way. Through Albert Network Monitoring and Management, analysts in the 24x7x365 CIS Security Operations Center (SOC) perform initial investigation by confirming malicious threat activity, reviewing any historical activity from the impacted host, gathering security recommendations for the affected organization, and notifying the affected entity with expert security analysis and guidance. The process takes an average of six minutes between event detection and notification, thus complementing your other ransomware defense measures with timely insights into malicious activity. Analysts in the CIS Cyber Incident Response Team (CIRT) are also available if your incident meets the criteria for appropriate casework at no cost to SLTTs with services that include incident response, forensic analysis, and malware analysis. You can complete a request for CIS CIRT assistance by contacting the CIS SOC 24x7x365 at [email protected].Ready to accelerate your ransomware defenses? Copyright © 2025 Center for Internet Security® "

action = "Based on your own knowledge, and the articles provided: Write a recommendation report. \
            This should be no more than: 1000 words long. \
            Written in the tone of: Cybersecurity Analyst. \
            Written by: Prompt muse. \
            Target Demographic is: 50-60 year olds, cybersecurity executives.\
            Quote the above sources where appropriate, please use the URL hyperlinked to anchor test which is a relative keyword or source name for the link. EG. <a href='https://forbes.com'>Forbes Article</a> said. \
            The article should flow well, start with a catchy introduction/hook, and end in a compelling, and thought-provoking conclusion/outro, and contain mitigations to issues. \
            Add a couple of sub-headings, but ONLY where appropriate - not too many. \
            Try to be unbiased and view different perspectives. \
            make sure to reference the COMPANY OVERVIEW where appropriate. use the IMPACT statment from the COMPANY OVERVIEW where appropriate \
            Create a catchy headline/title which would intrigue the reader.  \
            The primary topic is: Ransomware \
            The secondary topic is: Company Profile \
            Focus Keyword: Ransomware \
            Given this keyword, add as many cluster Keywords around this keyword, as you can within the article, and use a variety of Synonyms where applicable, within the article as possible.\
            Areas to cover: Impact, Mitigations, Exposure, References \
            ADD a DISCLAIMER that this report was written by a AI Language model with 'INL Inside'."
            

